What is your full name? Thank you for your full
name. What's your telephone number? Full name.
Everybody calls you Mrs. Beathard. That's all
right. Flossie. Flossie? I was Yocum. Flossie
Yocum Beathard. Flossie Yocum Beathard. Right.
That's B-E-A-T-H-A-R. Right. This is August 9th.
We're in Milano, Texas. That's right. We're
inside a gas station grocery store. We're talking
to Mrs. Beathard, who... I was born in 1904,
weren't you? 1904. Here in Milano, or was it right
over there? Over on Highway 79, over there. I was
born on one of the, what was it, the old Summers
Place at the time. My daddy didn't own any land at
that time. A little old rent house over there is
where I was born. Was your father a sharecropper?
No, no. Well, for a while he was. For a while he
rented, and then he bought him a place, see. They
bought him 132 acres. So he was able to be a renter
and save up enough money to buy it. Yes, yes he did.
How was your father involved with the mines? He
worked in the mine quite a bit. He actually worked
in the mine some. Okay, and what was his name?
Walter, Walter Yochum. Walter Yochum. That's
right, okay. He worked in the mine, and also my
grandpa McCoy worked in the mine. He was Daniel
McCoy. He's the one that got hurt in the mind. You
know, I was telling you yesterday about some of it
falling in on him and they brought him up and the
company doctor was there. They called him and my
daddy was the only one that could hold him because
he was in so much pain. The others left. They
couldn't stand to see him in so much pain, see. Do
you remember about what year that was? It must have
been about 1906, about that. You were about two
years old. I was about two years old. Do you
remember which mine you're on? That was the big
lump. Big lump. Yes. Because part of that coal come
out from under his place. And my grandmother drew a
little rod off that coal for many years. See, back
then there weren't any old age pensions at all. And
that helped her a lot, my grandma McCoy. It helped
her quite a bit. And I remember she'd tell my mama,
well, I got my money today. And that, you see, I
suppose the reason, one reason, he liked to work
there. And, of course, my daddy was his
son-in-law, you see, and they sort of all worked
together. And then when my Uncle Dave got big
enough, he went to work in it. I see. Well, did they
have a foreman system, a gang system? Something
like that, yes. Sort of a straw boss, you know. One
that kept books, too, you know. And...
And we're speaking about the people over there,
those Mexican people. A lot of them, they have
pretty flowers in their yard. Seemed like they
wanted flowers and they'd have a little garden. I
remember the corn growing and their peppers, you
know. They're like lots of hot pepper, you see. And
they ground corn themselves? I think so. I believe
some of them did. And like I said, the young women,
it was very dressy when they went out, you know. And
that was usually just on the weekends? Usually on
Saturday afternoons, you'd see them walk into
town, you know. They'd walk to Rockdale? They'd
walk to Rockdale, Rockdale. And that was two to
four miles? Yes, quite a spell, you see. Of course,
some of them on up to Texas Mine, they'd walk up
there, too, and we'd see them, you see. I see. They
had their own cemetery, even, and it's still over
there. Oh, really? A Mexican cemetery. And when
we'd come back home from Rockdale a little late,
And after they'd had a funeral, see, they'd leave
candles burning. And it sure would look spooky out
there in that cemetery, you know, all those
candles and flowers and everything. It's still
there. Well, did the Mexicans have a separate
church? Yes, they did. They had the Catholic
Church over there. The Catholic Church near the
Texas Coal Company? It is across the street there,
the road, rather, from Big Blunt Commissary. Most
of them did go there. Do you remember the name of it?
No, I don't. I really don't. What church did you go
to? Well, we usually went there to Sandy Creek.
Whoever was preaching it, you know, we'd go to the
Baptists or the Methodists or the Church of
Christ, you know. Sounds good. Just whoever you
like to hear. Yeah, we'd go and have those
protracted meetings, you know, and have a week's
meeting. We'd go at night. They had beautiful
singing, you know, and we enjoyed it. But the
Mexicans even had their own school over there. one
of the vulgar girls taught school over there wow
now that is later though gusta that's the vulgar
she taught school i don't know if that's still
living or not 1920s i really don't know somewhere
like that i think yeah i know it's before i ever
married so i don't know whether gusta and middle
still living or not it's a pretty girl You were
telling me yesterday that your father cut timber.
Oh, yes. Out of the woods, out of our woods. Out of
your woods. Yes, yes. And they had to be big, and
they had to be pretty tall where a man could stand
up. And then they'd frame it from one big post to the
other in there, frame it up, as they called it, to
keep that dirt off of them. So he would have to take
the bark off of them? No, they didn't have to be
bark. Just saw the edges smooth and have all the
limbs cut. They had to be, you know. That's all
right. No, he didn't have to cut the bark off. He
used a cross saw to cut all this? Yes. He used an axe
to cut them down? Well, I think he sawed them down
mostly with a saw, some kind of an axe. But then the
ends had to be tall and smooth, you see. Did he do
this by himself? Yes. Yes. I've seen scars on his
shoulders where he lifted them heavy things. He
must have been a big man. He was. He was a pretty good
size. Healthy and young, you know. He didn't mind
looking. But I went with him here and everywhere he
went, you know, helped him open gates. You were his
favorite daughter? Well, they say I was, but
because I was always hanging around, see, it
wasn't that he really cared more about me than I was
always there underfoot. And if he got ready to go to
Rockdale, I'd go harness his team up, see, his
horse. I knew how to put the harness on her, see,
back into the buggy. fix her up and get ready. I
could get ready to go in five minutes, and my older
sister would take her hour, because she had to fix
her hair all pretty. Right. Well, did you go to
school in Rockville? No, we went to Sandy Creek and
Milano. Sandy Creek and Milano. Papa would send us
a while at Sandy Creek, and then he'd send us to
Milano. I don't know why, but he did that. How many
months out of the year did you go to school? Oh,
about seven months, sometime eight. But I
remember I took Latin one year, and it was plum
funny. The teacher didn't know algebra. They were
going to teach us algebra to come at a time to have
algebra. She didn't know algebra. She said, well,
just take a year of Latin. Now, you know that Latin.
It didn't ever do anyone any good. She was going to
make a pharmacist or a doctor or something. Do you
know what were the same courses offered in your
school as were offered in the Mexican schools? I
don't really know, but I think so. I think they were
about the same. I wish you could see Gusta, and ask
her about these things. But she's older than me.
She may not be living yet. Gusta, G-U-S-T-A, Gusta
Vogel. She had a sister named Menta. It's a pretty
black-headed girl. They looked Italian, but they
weren't Italian people. They were German,
actually. I think so. I think so. They were pretty.
Well, did you ever have social gatherings with
Mexican miners? Not really not, no. Very little
contact. Very little contact with. They was
always friendly, and like I was talking to Simone
Dowd and about it, I said, we never had any trouble
with those people. They were nice and good, most of
them, see. Seemed like they was all pretty
peaceable. And one thing to it, they was very
devoted to their families. Close-knit families,
all of them, see, seemed like. They didn't travel
around much? Not too much. They just came to town on
the weekends? Came to town on the weekends, seemed
like, go to church or something like that, you
know. Then you just didn't see them? No, you didn't
see them much, no. You said something about that
you and your father sold a truck farm to you? Oh,
yes. Yes, we'd go through those camps, you know.
Well, he wouldn't let me go with him much when he was
selling watermelons. We'd raise watermelons,
you see, and take them through there. Sandias,
Sandias, they'd buy those watermelons, don't you
see? Sandias is watermelons? And we sold them
cheap, but it was a little money in the summertime,
don't you see? Before the cotton got ready to pick.
So your father was mainly a cotton farmer. That's
right, that's right. When did he quit farming?
When he got too old. What about mining? Oh, he
didn't work in the mine very long. When he got his
land, he quit. Okay, so by working in the mine, he
was able to save his money to buy his land. Well, no,
not really. He sharecropped. He worked, you see,
he rented the land, see, rented land first, you
see, before he bought his. And then he bought land
that could be mine. Mm-hmm. Do you remember about
what year he started mining? Well, he just worked
in the mine, you know. When I was a child, a little,
two and three years old, when he worked in the mine,
you see. And later, he done all I remember. I don't
even hardly remember him working in the mine, you
see. I remember Uncle Dave working in the mine. And
that was your father's older brother? No, it was
Mama's brother, you see. Uncle Dave McCoy. See, I
was a yokel. My daddy was yokel. And your mother was
McCoy? McCoy. Do you know where they came from,
where the McCoys came from? No, I really don't
know. I know more about my daddy's people than I did
my mama's people. He was Irish, and I think he had a
blue uniform, which looked like, as we used to say,
I believe he's a Yankee. But I'm not sure. He was a
good man.
So he was born here in the United States? Yes, oh
yes, oh yes. Did his parents immigrate over? No,
no. They were born here also? Mm-hmm. Now, my
daddy's people is different all the time. Papa's
daddy was about quarter Indian, and he was a Civil
War veteran. My grandpa Yocum, see?
He didn't like Yankees. He was born in Virginia,
and he was in the last battle he was in, the Battle of
Gettysburg. We were wounded. So your grandfather
was a Confederate soldier. Right. And your father
was the Irishman you were talking about? No, my
grandpa McCoy. McCoy, OK. He was the Irishman. I
want to make that clear. Yes. McCoy was the
Irishman. And he was the Irishman, yes. But we've
got away from the mining. You're not going to learn
anything about it. Well, that's all important. We
need to find out where everybody came from. So my
grandpa was born in Virginia. Like I say, he got
wounded in Gettysburg and had to walk home. That's
Pennsylvania, you know. You see? He walked home.
He was a big man, quarter Indian. Do you think he'd
done any mining in Pennsylvania before he came
here? No. No, because he was born in Virginia, you
see. And he was carpenter and a schoolteacher, my
grandpa Yoakum was, until he joined the rebel
army, see? He taught school and was a carpenter.
And then he came to Texas after school? Yes. Oh,
yes. Well, you know, back to the mining, how did the
people of Rockdale and Milano view the mines? It
seems that most of this area is agricultural. Were
the mines a positive thing? Yes, it was all right.
It was a help. Some people, even, like I say, white
people, worked there, and it was a help to them. And
they didn't resent the Mexicans, didn't seem like
at all. I know we didn't. You want to go ahead and
take care of your business here? Oh, yeah. It
really is. One thing I'm curious about, again, you
may not know the answer to this, but that's all
right. But did your father and your uncle, did they
sing in the mines at all? Did the Mexicans sing
songs as they were working? I don't remember for
sure whether they ever spoke of them singing there
or not. They're hard-working people.
I don't know whether they ever did or not. But they
had, they loved music, you know. I think they had
most of their music at home when they got home, you
know. You're talking about the Mexicans? The
Mexicans, uh-huh. Yes. I saw one place where, uh,
that the white families would hire the Mexican
bands for parties. Do you remember any of that? Not
really. That must have been over around Rockland
or where you see it. I was over here closer to
Milano, you know, in Sandy Creek. Well, would you
consider Milano and Sandy Creek more center
mining area in Rockdale? No, I don't think so. I
think Sandy Creek and Rockdale would be more of the
center of mining, because Sandow was down there
way a long time ago. Sandow, which is now, as you
know, Alcoa. And they had a Sandow mine down there a
long years ago, you see. They had that, they still
have it, that Sandow Southern Railroad. They
still have that. Once your daddy quit mining and
went to cotton farming and agricultural work, did
you have occasion to run into miners? Oh, well,
once in a while, some of the boys that worked in the
mine went to school with us. Oh, yes, the white
boys. The white boys. Uh-huh, the white boys. No,
they had their own school over there. But we
wouldn't have resented them. You know, I wouldn't
have. Did they have Mexican teachers, or were
they... No, you see my second or third or fourth
cousin, she was distal to Gustav Vogel. She was a
black girl, you see. She taught the Mexican
children. And I have wondered, I guess she taught
them English, you see. Surely she didn't teach
them Spanish, because
they are, you know... So you think... That's where
the young Mexican children learn English within
their school. Yes, I do. Do you remember where the
Mexicans came from? Do you remember how they got to
Mexico? Not really, just like they do now, I guess,
from Mexico. See, we still occasionally have
Mexicans around here that can't speak any English
at all. So there'd be illegal aliens? Some of them.
But back then they didn't pay much attention to
that. But they weren't naturalized citizens. A
lot of them weren't. Sure they weren't. Did they
seem to be happy with the day in the mine? Yes. Yes,
it did. I believe they were happy, yes. Well, what
happened when the mine wasn't operating? What did
the Mexican families do? Well, it was much—they
operated for a long, long, long time. And it seemed
like if one closed or kind of slowed up, they'd just
go over the other one. I see. You see what I mean?
Right. So there weren't that many new people
coming in and the same people moving from mind to
mind? I think so. Do you remember any labor unions
or labor troubles? No, not really. No, I don't
think they had any trouble with them letting me get
to this place. Sure.
Right, so you did go, did you visit the Texas coal
camp at all? Just through it, just through it, you
know, you couldn't. My daddy would never let me
around the mines at all. See, the reason, I wish I
could have gone, you know, into the mines, or close
and let them work a little more. Yeah, but your dad
wouldn't let you. No, no, indeed no, indeed no.
Well,
it looked like two and three, two and three rooms.
Sometimes a little porch and sometimes no porch.
Sometimes they looked pretty bedraggled,
pretty, you know, shackly. Sometimes they looked
pretty good. You know, I think the company built
those houses. There's a few of them painted. But I
know they tried to look like, keep their yards
clean, like I said, with flowers. Very energetic
people, it seemed like. have their little gardens
and things you know women were there any women that
worked in mind no not really no no no they always had
a bunch of children you know there's a lot always
lots of children in the mexican families you know
they're all you know catholics and they believe
you know they believe in children right you see you
know how young the children were they went to work
for the mines Or was there a law? I don't think
there's any law, really. I think some of them could
go to work at 15 or 16. I knew a white boy that went to
school over at Sandy Creek, and I think he was about
16 and he worked in the mine. Because I remember
he'd get his face all black, and he couldn't hardly
get all that black coal out of the pores of his skin,
you know. It's hard to get clean. Kind of like this
coal over here at IGC in Alcoa now, you know. It
really gets in there. How did your dad get the coal
off of you? Oh, he just, like the rest of them, just
scrubbed it off the best he could, you know. Was he
in a strong lie zone? Oh, no, no, no. Well, you see,
after they got grown, what I mean, really have a
beard, a lot of that would shave off, really, you
see. Papa always went slick shaved. And so they
didn't really have much trouble with that. They
lacked a little money, and like I say, now that
helped the people in general. You know what I mean?
Yes, because...
You say there's very few black people that work?
That's right. Very few black people that work at
the mine. Did
most black people just farm back then? Yes, and
farm, you know, and work for other people back then
days. Pick cotton for people and worked in the
fields for them. And you see, they weren't allowed
to go to our schools at that time, you see. They had
their own schools. They had their own church also?
Well, they still do that. They still do that. These
people right here have got their own church right
down here in this community. Did the Mexicans and
the blacks get together at all? Not much back in
them days. They seemed like they weren't very
sociable between each other. Now, you know,
there's always exceptions to the rules. It's like
you'd meet someone that you liked, someone you
didn't, or something like that. They didn't
really mix. I think the Mexican people thought
they were just a little bit, I'll put it this way,
above the blacks. In the back, just the same way.
Each one was a little proud of his race. We'll put it
like that.
Okay. If we go back to the mine sites that you did
see, you were talking about the flowers and the
particular attacks. Did they have a cooking...
mostly of the inside mostly of the inside yes
because we can see them stove pipes you know with
the stove inside then of course like i say they they
use lignite i'm sure because the smoke was too
black would you think those were the old franklin
stoves well just old iron wood stoves i think yeah
yes but you see you could get them that burn wood or
coal either one i had one at one time and it would
they had the special coal grate in there you see i
took the coal grate out and used wood 40, 50 years
ago, back when I was sort of young. Did you like to
cook with lignite coal? I never did get to cook with
it. See, we took that grate out of our stove and used
wood. I never did use the coal at all. Why was that?
Because wood was... Wood was plentiful at that
time, you see. Everybody had their own way of
getting their wood, you know, and preparing it for
the winter and for the stove. We had fireplaces.
What happened in the late 20s, early 30s, when the
rest of the country was going through a
devastating depression? It was terrible. There
was a change here? There was a drastic change here.
The people that owned their homes and already had
their cattle, their chickens, their hogs, had a
little money. They'd done pretty good. I'll tell
you why. Most of them, they learned to grow their
own food most days. their sweet potatoes, their
ice potatoes, their fruits, peanuts, all of that,
corn, make their corn meal if they needed it. And
we, and raise hogs and have their meat, you see. So
they didn't depend on store-bought things
altogether. Didn't take much money. And the ones
that had their own homes, done fairly well. My
daddy and mother did.
But some of them, you know, that didn't, It's
pretty rough. Well, would the miners be in that
category? How did they get through the
depression? A lot of that had done slowed up then.
Excuse me. I don't know. You see, later on, we
didn't have any relief for anyone then. But later,
they did have. I don't know when it was. In the 30s, I
think. Well, one thing I noticed. Excuse me. Sure.
Sure. Around 1931, Rockdale was turning out the
highest volume of lignite. And I was just
wondering how that worked in. Well, it still
helped. It all helped. And I expect the miners
didn't suffer as much as the farmers.
Now, for instance, the people worked on the
railroad. They had their money. They done pretty
good, see? People without jobs, though, it's
rough. They didn't own any land. They didn't own
their homes. You see what I mean? There's certain
classes of people that it hurt worse than others,
is what I'm trying to say. You don't think miners
were hurt that much? Not really, no. Do you
remember when the first truck came to this area?
First truck? Yeah. Oh, man. That's
hard to say. Did they use trucks in coal mines, or
was it mainly railroads and mules? Railroads and
mules. They had them little spurs. They run a
little track out to these mines, you see, to pick
this coal up. You see? Especially little
railroads, little tracks made, you see, to go out
to these. We called them spurs. They loaded that on
those cars. And I think they took them over around
Taylor, or somewhere, and shipped it off. Alcoa,
you see, it was Sandow then, they had their own
railroad. And they brought it out. And these,
right over at Big Lump, they had a spur. I'd come in
and picked it up, and over to Texas Mines and all, of
Ogles and them others. And the little old roads
were sort of small. Once one man got killed over
there. It was a white man, too. One of them little
coal cars ran over him and killed him. Do you
remember that when that was? No, I don't. I think it
was in the 30s. I really do think it was in the early
30s. Guy Clymore. Guy Clymore? Mm-hmm. He got
killed. C-L-Y-M-O-R-E? Mm-hmm. See, I can check
that. Yes, you could. You can check that out. One
thing, did you ever go inside one of the
commissaries? Yeah. What did the day look like?
Well, I was talking about that to Alvin this
morning. I said, there's two of them that I've been
in. I said, it looked a little like, part of it like
the old-fashioned banks used to be, you know. Them
enclosures where, you know, it was where they paid
their men, paid their people, and where you could
pay for what you got. You know, cages like in there.
Oh, I... It is... Wire, heavy wire, whatever you
want to call it. A grate? Uh-huh, like that. That's
what I'm trying to say. They had a little opening
where they could pass money back and forth. Where
were the goods? Oh, just stacked up around. Just
stacks of mostly general groceries, you know. Did
the people of Rockville trade at the concert? No,
no, not much. That is mostly the miners. But the
miners did go into Rockville to... Oh, yes. Oh,
yes. Because they didn't have to trade at the
commissary. They wasn't forced to. It was just
handy for them, see? It was just handy for them, and
they could buy their groceries there and save them
going into town, don't you see? And I believe the
way they done that, too, a lot of times they could
buy it, you know, and just take it out of their
check, and they'd go to pay them, you know? You see
what I mean? Were the prices higher in the
commissary? A little bit. A little higher, yes.
Uh-huh. I used to go over there at 12 o'clock to the
Big Blunt commissary if I needed a pencil or a
tablet or something from the schoolhouse. And of
course, I'd pick me up a little candy or something
too, you know. And right over here, like I said, I
went over there with my daddy on the wagon loaded
with those mining timbers. And I drank my red soda
water and ate my candy. Yeah. Quite a lot. I can go
right back through this road here, you know. See,
it was just a frame. You took the bed off the wagon,
you see, and you'd have to have just the frame, you
know. to carry those big logs. I called them logs.
And then when we went back, I could ride that back
cupton pole and have fun, you know. You didn't help
your dad unload them, did you? Oh, no. He unloaded
them all by himself? Yes, he did. And then the
miners themselves put the timber in there. Oh,
that's right. They done that. Yeah. Do you know
about how big the commissary was? The ones that I
was in is... I balked a team. A mule would go this way
and then this way. You ever see a team balk? One
would fly back and the other would pull. The other
would fly back and the other would pull. And Papa
laughed. And the man looked around at him and took
after him with a knife about that long. And, of
course, Papa shouldn't have done it, but he was
laughing. And he had to run. He run and he got into
that story in that commissary and he went on
upstairs, see? And the man was right after him.
With the knife. With the knife. And there's a black
man. come down and he says, stop right where you
are. He had a pick in his hand. And my dad and you
where they kept a pistol upstairs there, see, at
that time. And that's what he's going to go after.
But he didn't have to make it up there. The black man
had the pick. But they picked Colway, you know.
Told him, stop right there. And that ended it up. I
said, Papa, you shouldn't have laughed at him.
Well, he said it was funny. I had to laugh. That's a
marvelous story. Yeah. Well, did you see any of the
tools? Nothing but picks. Picks? Picks. You were
talking about the hats yesterday. Oh, yeah.
Little old caps, you know, with a carbide light
that fit in on the front. Were they cloth hats or
metal hats? No, they weren't metal. They were just
cloth hats that would come around, you know, just
to hold that. A little bill to it, you know. Little
things set up there and give them a little dim
light. Terrible work, all right. But they seemed
to be happy.
And there were no unions and no strikes? No, I don't
think they were. I never heard of any trouble like
that. And that cave in, that was on that slope mine,
and Alvin mentioned that to me this morning. What,
back in 1913? Something like that. And I had forgot
about it. There might have been some more
tragedies over there, but I can't remember. Well,
I think that was the biggest tragedy. Yeah. Of
course, I didn't know about it. this uh white man
getting killed yeah yeah now somewhere in the 30s i
think a guy crime or yes he did he got killed there
one of those coal cars run over it was it being
pulled